Redefine section on sizing data nodes (#90274)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/how-to/size-your-shards.asciidoc

// TEST[setup:my_index]

[discrete]

> [[fields-heap-recommendation]]

Reviewer: These IDs form part of URLs so it's best not to change them - for instance renaming this ID will break any links to https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/size-your-shards.html#field-count-recommendation

==== The heap of data nodes should suffice for the fields of indices, plus overheads

You can use the <<cluster-nodes-stats,Nodes stats API>>'s `mappings` indices
statistic, to get the number of field mappings of indices and an estimation of
their heap overhead per node.

[source,console]
----

> GET _nodes/stats/indices?human&filter_path=nodes.*.indices.mappings.total_estimated_overhead*

Reviewer: On reflection I think it would be better to get all the data in a single call (plus node names too):

`/_nodes/stats?human&filter_path=nodes.*.name,nodes.*.indices.mappings.total_estimated_overhead*,nodes.*.jvm.mem.heap_max*`

It'd be useful to have some example output in these docs too.

----
// TEST[setup:my_index]

Additionally, you must also allow enough heap for {es}'s
baseline usage as well as your workload such as indexing, searches and
aggregations. 0.5GB of extra heap will suffice for many reasonable workloads,
and you may need even less if your workload is very light while heavy workloads
may require more. You can use the <<cluster-nodes-stats,Nodes stats API>>'s
`jvm` statistic, to check the maximum amount of available heap memory per node.

[source,console]
----
GET _nodes/stats/jvm?human&filter_path=nodes.*.jvm.mem.heap_max*
----
// TEST[setup:my_index]

Ensure that the reported max heap memory for each node is 0.5GB more than the
node's field mappings' estimated heap overhead. If this is not the case, you

> can <<set-jvm-heap-size,set the JVM heap size>> appropriately.

Reviewer: We generally recommend letting Elasticsearch set the heap size, and in Cloud this isn't really under the user's control anyway. Better to suggest something less precise like scaling up the cluster (which means both adding nodes and adding memory) I think, or else maybe redistributing shards.

Reviewer: ... or indeed linking to `avoid-unnecessary-fields`

[discrete]
[[field-count-recommendation]]

> ==== The heap of nodes should suffice for the fields, plus overheads

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Allow enough heap on data nodes for field mappers and overheads
```

Author: I thought the first section on deduplicated fields applies to all nodes, whether they are data nodes or not, right? That's why I did not mention "data nodes" in the title. Should I leave it generic or mention "data nodes"?

Author: Fixed, but left it generic (without "data node").

> The different index field mappings have overhead for the heap of the nodes.
> The heap of the nodes should suffice for the field mappings, and also allow
> some additional leeway for other overheads (e.g., related to the workload).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mapped fields consume some heap memory on each node, and require extra 
heap on data nodes.
Ensure each node has enough heap for mappings, and also allow
extra space for overheads associated with its workload. The following sections
show how to determine these heap requirements.
```

> ===== Field information in the cluster state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
===== Mapping metadata in the cluster state
```

node. For nodes which are not data nodes, this field may be zero.

[source,console]
----
GET _nodes/stats?human&filter_path=nodes.*.name,nodes.*.indices.mappings.total_estimated_overhead*,nodes.*.jvm.mem.heap_max*
----
// TEST[setup:node]

For each node, this will show you information like in this example output:

[source,console-result]
----
{
  "nodes": {
    "USpTGYaBSIKbgSUJR2Z9lg": {
      "name": "node-0",
      "indices": {
        "mappings": {
          "total_estimated_overhead": "1gb",
          "total_estimated_overhead_in_bytes": 1073741824
        }
      },
      "jvm": {
        "mem": {
          "heap_max": "4gb",
          "heap_max_in_bytes": 4294967296
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
----
// TESTRESPONSE[s/"USpTGYaBSIKbgSUJR2Z9lg"/\$node_name/]
// TESTRESPONSE[s/"name": "node-0"/"name": $body.$_path/]
// TESTRESPONSE[s/"total_estimated_overhead": "1gb"/"total_estimated_overhead": $body.$_path/]
// TESTRESPONSE[s/"total_estimated_overhead_in_bytes": 1073741824/"total_estimated_overhead_in_bytes": $body.$_path/]
// TESTRESPONSE[s/"heap_max": "4gb"/"heap_max": $body.$_path/]
// TESTRESPONSE[s/"heap_max_in_bytes": 4294967296/"heap_max_in_bytes": $body.$_path/]

> ===== Finally consider additional heap overheads

Reviewer: ```suggestion
===== Consider additional heap overheads
```

Apart from the two field overhead metrics above, you must additionally allow
enough heap for {es}'s baseline usage as well as your workload such as indexing,
searches and aggregations. 0.5GB of extra heap will suffice for many reasonable
workloads, and you may need even less if your workload is very light while heavy
workloads may require more.

> As an example, consider the outputs above for a data node. The heap of the node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Example

As an example, consider the outputs above for a data node. The heap of the node
```

[discrete]
[[field-count-recommendation]]

> ==== Allow enough heap on nodes for field mappers and overheads

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Allow enough heap for field mappers and overheads
```

extra space for overheads associated with its workload. The following sections
show how to determine these heap requirements.

[discrete]
===== Mapping metadata in the cluster state

Each node in the cluster has a copy of the <<cluster-state-api-desc,cluster state>>.
The cluster state includes information about the field mappings for
each index. This information has heap overhead. You can use the
<<cluster-stats,Cluster stats API>> to get the heap overhead of the total size of
all mappings after deduplication and compression.

[source,console]
----
GET _cluster/stats?human&filter_path=indices.mappings.total_deduplicated_mapping_size*
----
// TEST[setup:node]

This will show you information like in this example output:

[source,console-result]
----
{
  "indices": {
    "mappings": {
      "total_deduplicated_mapping_size": "1gb",
      "total_deduplicated_mapping_size_in_bytes": 1073741824
    }
  }
}
----
// TESTRESPONSE[s/"total_deduplicated_mapping_size": "1gb"/"total_deduplicated_mapping_size": $body.$_path/]
// TESTRESPONSE[s/"total_deduplicated_mapping_size_in_bytes": 1073741824/"total_deduplicated_mapping_size_in_bytes": $body.$_path/]

[discrete]

> ===== Getting the max heap and any additional field overhead per node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
===== Retrieving heap size and field mapper overheads
```

You can use the <<cluster-nodes-stats,Nodes stats API>> to get two relevant metrics
for each node:

> * The maximum amount of available heap memory per node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The size of the heap on each node.
```
